EventHeader Update (#5)
edward-swirldslabs/hedera-improvement-proposal: HIP/hip-1056.md

The event header depicts the beginning of an event. All items after this and before the next `EventHeader` or
`BlockProof` are part of this event or results of execution of this event’s contents. It is designed so that it is easy
to reconstruct `GossipEvent`s as needed for hashgraph reconstruction from the contents in the block stream. To make
that easy `EventHeader` includes the the `EventCore` that is part of `GossipEvent` and all transactions are defined 
as`EventTransaction` which can be used unchanged to construct the original `GossipEvent`. 

To save space in each block and in the block stream, the signature on an event is not kept unless it is used in 

> deciding a coin round in consensus.  Trust that the event is authentic will come from the block proof for the 

Reviewer: this is already outdated

Author: updated.

contains the data in the `EventCore`.  Trust that the event is authentic will come from the block proof for the 
block containing the event.  The `EventHeader` will contain all the data necessary to reconstruct the `EventCore`. 
The primary space saving comes from replacing the `EventDescriptors` used to indicate the parents of each event.  
Within block, if an `EventDescriptor` of a parent points to an event outside the block, the `EventHeader` will 
continue to preserve an `EventDescriptor` that points to that event.  If the parent is contained within this block, 
however, the `EventDescriptor` is replaced with a `uint64` index that indicates which event from the start of the 
block is the parent event.  This index is 0 based.  The first few events from each node in each block will start out 
with `EventDescriptors` for parents outside the block.  As the index increases, events will begin to have parents in 
the block.  Each `EventDescriptor` is 72 bytes whereas each `uint64` is 8 bytes.  This space saving is important for 
networks with low user transaction activity to minimize the space occupied by events not containing transactions.

> 

Reviewer 2: Just a thought.
Instead of a left-to-right index (which is a bit less certain than might be ideal), would it make sense to use a merkle path within the event subtree?

Basically we're constructing the event subtree for hashing, if we replace the parent with a merkle path (instead of just a number) we use the same amount of bytes (8), but we have a more certain location reference in the case where filtering removed some items.

Author: That is a great suggestion.  Let me see if I can weigh through the pro-con.  

If we are placing events in their own merkle sub-tree and balancing it with virtual null values, then if every left branching child is 0 and every right branching child is 1, then the index and the merkle path have the same binary representation, modulo bit shifting the index value for the depth of the binary tree.  

Are we optimizing the storage of block items on disk to be random access traversable through the merkle paths?

Reviewer 2: On-disk the block is the same bytes in the same order that they were received from consensus.

It's more that if we filter a subset of events from the stream, the indices could all be wrong if they're based on order-in-stream (because some events are now replaced with a filtered item), but if we use the merkle path, we'll still have the correct indices for the remaining items.

Author: Here's a wrinkle.  

Suppose the desired event is unfiltered, but it (or an ancestor event) contains a index/path reference to a filtered event.  That event header would never be able to be translated into the event core.     In that regard I think we should not support translation to event core on filtered streams.    Any filtered event header or input transaction will cause the hash of the event descriptor to be unrecoverable.

Author: To clarify, this is because the event hash is not based on a merkle path hashing of transactions.   The whole byte sequence of the serialized event+transactions is hashed without awareness of sub-structure.

Reviewer 2: Good point.  We _can_ reconstruct in filtered streams, with the requirement that no event is filtered out (though the related transactions might be).
I like the "reliability" of a merkle path, but I suppose that stream-order index works about as well.  It does require holding a count when writing the block stream, but that is probably better than requiring the block to be "complete" (or some variant thereof) in order to generate the subtree before writing events.

I cannot resolve these conversations, but I stand convinced to leave it as a stream-order index.

That said, if it is a stream-order index, it can be uint32.  There is zero chance we'll ever have a single block with over a billion events.

Author: agreed with uint32.  I will update.

 */
message EventHeader {
    /**
    * An event core value.<br/>
    * This contains information about the event creator and the event
    * "parents". Event "parents" includes the "self parent" if any.
    */

>     com.hedera.hapi.platform.event.EventCore event_core = 1;

Reviewer 3: This feels a real shame, as we went to a great effort in the beginning to make EventCore common between block stream and gossip. It would be really nice if we can keep that. The idea was it make it very easy to reconstruct the events to replay from block stream. Is there a way to make this still possible?

Author: The `EventHeader` has all the same data, just with the flexibility of replacing the parent `EventDescriptors` with indexes internal to the block.   It's no skin off my back to modify `EventCore` with the same  `EventParent` which contains a oneof(`EventDescriptor`, `uint64`).   

Doing it this way has no impact on the consensus team.   Modifying the `EventCore` means the consensus team has to create checks that no one in gossip is sending events with index based parent references.  

@poulok and @lpetrovich05 need to weigh in on that impact.

Reviewer 4: I am opposed to modifying the protobuf definition used for gossiped events to include something that is never allowed to be gossiped. If we are replacing parent hashes with indices (for events whose parents are inside the block), then we will have to transform the block before using to replay. It's not much more to add to that something that takes all these primitives and reconstructs the `EventCore` object at the same time. `EventCore` should not have the option to specify parents with indices, and I don't see any other way around that than what Ed has done here.

Author: Lazar's suggestion below would restore data structure commonality between gossip and block stream.

    /**
     * The birth round of the event.<br/>
     * The birth round SHALL be the pending consensus round at the time the event is created.<br/>
     * The pending consensus round SHALL be **one greater** than the latest round to reach consensus.
     */
    int64 birth_round = 2;

    /**
     * The wall clock time at which the event was created, according to the node creating the event.<br/>
     * If the event has a self parent, this timestamp MUST be strictly greater than the `time_created` of the self parent.
     */
    proto.Timestamp time_created = 3;

    /**

>      * A list of EventDescriptors or indexes to eents within the block representing the parents of this event.<br/>

Reviewer 4: I saw this, so I had to leave a comment ^.^
```suggestion
     * A list of EventDescriptors or indices to events within the block representing the parents of this event.<br/>
```

Author: fixed in the next commit

>      * A list of EventDescriptors or indexes to eents within the block representing the parents of this event.<br/>
>      * The list of parents SHALL include zero or one self parents, and zero or more other parents.<br/>
>      * The first element of the list SHALL be the self parent, if one exists.<br/>
>      * The list of parents SHALL NOT include more than one parent from the same creator.

Reviewer 2: Just an example of how we might improve these specification items
```suggestion
     * A list of "parent" descriptors.<br/>
     * Each entry can be an `EventDescriptor` or an index to an event
     * within the block. These items represent the parents of this event.
     * <p>
     * This list SHALL include zero or one self parents.<br/>
     * This list SHALL include zero or more other parents.<br/>
     * The first element of this list SHALL be the self parent,
     * if one exists.<br/>
     * This list SHALL NOT include more than one parent from the
     * same creator.
```

Author: text will be updated to reflect this in the next commit.

     */
    repeated EventParent parents = 4;

    /**
     * The event specification version.<br/>
     * The specification described by this version SHALL encompass the format of the `GossipEvent` message, and also the
     * format of all contained messages.<br/>
     * This SHALL exactly match the specification version passed into the platform at construction.
     */
    proto.SemanticVersion version = 17; // This field is temporary until birth_round migration is complete. Field number 17 chosen to avoid polluting cheaper 1 byte field numbers 1-16
}

message EventParent {
    oneof parent {
        EventDescriptor event_descriptor = 1;
        uint64 event_index = 2;

>     }

Reviewer 2: Three items here:
1. We often only include a reduced version (without most of the specification requirements; just the first line subject and any description) of the proto content here when the protos are large; the full details are in the assets folder.
2. The same changes you have here need to be made to the full proto files in the `assets/hip-1056` folder.
3. The style for specification text has three parts
   * Subject line (first line)
   * Description (after first line, separated by `<br/>`)
   * Specification Requirements
      * For messages, a blank line, then each requirement separated by `<br/>`
      * For fields a line with `<p>`, then each requirement separated by `<br/>`
         * The difference is to work around limitations in markdown tables

Author: next commit: 
* update to asset directory
* reduced comments for protobuf in HIP text. 

Hopefully I have the format right. :-)

message EventHeader {
    /**
       * The creator node identifier.<br/>
       */
    int64 creator_node_id = 1;

    /**
     * The birth round of the event.
     */
    int64 birth_round = 2;

    /**
     * The wall clock time at which the event was created, according to the node creating the event.
     */
    proto.Timestamp time_created = 3;

    /**
     * A list of references to parent events.
     */
    repeated ParentEventReference parents = 4;

    /**
     * The event specification version.
     */

>     proto.SemanticVersion version = 17; 

Reviewer 2: Is birth round migration complete, and can we remove this field?

Author: not yet, but we might be able to make this a priority and get it done.   

I don't know if this comment is still valid.  It was introduced by Cody a long time ago.  I will confer with the consensus team and see if we need it and how soon we can remove it.

Author: After a conversation with Leemon today, this field is unnecessary for its commented purpose and we will remove it in the block stream.

Reviewer: Please do not remove it just yet, we don't have a final decision about the BR migration. Pining @poulok since she is involved in this

Author: Since this field is in the `EventCore` and that is being preserved, whether it stays in or is removed is up to the consensus team. :-)

}

/*
 * A reference to a parent event.
 */
message ParentEventReference {

    oneof parent {
        /**

>          * The EventDescriptor of the parent event outside the containing block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
         * An EventDescriptor for the parent event outside of the containing block.
```

Author: Hadn't seen it yet.   Will read now.

         */
        proto.EventDescriptor descriptor = 2;

        /**

>          * The index of the parent event within the containing block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
         * An index of the parent event within the containing block.
```
